IMPORTANT RULE: X Independent Nondescendents | Parents

Common Parent:
Usually not independent. Fixing parent, makes it independent.

Cascade:
Usually not independent. Fixing middle, makes it independent. Note: (with just conditional indepence, it looks exactly like Common Parent, so its indistringuisable)

V Structure:
  A -> B <-C, A and C are indepenent usually, but conditioned on B they are coupled. This can be used to destroy possible graph structures. [explaining away]

Active path is undirected path that connects two nodes and couples them. Use the above rules, and confirm that every triple satisfies the conditions. If no active path, they are conditionally independent. Reverse is not true.

All non-active paths capture conditional independencies, but not all conditional independencies are captured in non active paths. [You can still have conditional indepencies built into the table (not on the strucutral level) based on numbers]

Hidden Markov Models.

Hidden State (Y) that varies through time. Observed state X that is emitted for each given state. States only depend on their immediate history.

I-Map is an independence map, claims that any non active paths in the graph imply conditional independences in the underlying distribution through subset. Minimal I-map means every single edge is important (if you remove one edge it breaks)

Perfect map is a map that captures all the dependencies in the distribution. Does not always exist, is not always unique. X->Y and Y->X look the same from this POV.

I-equivalent graphs can't be distinguished through conditional independence. Any graph without V structures is I-equivalent. I-equivalent graphs must have the same skeleton (undirected edges). This makes sense because the active paths (sans V structures) is undirected. But even V structures have unique independence with pathing.

If two graphs have the same skeleton and the same V structures, then they are I-equivalent.


Q: I'm not quite sure if I truly understand the difference between Perfect Maps/ I maps and representing everything in a probability distribution. Is it just able to sample, but not actually get the independencies correctly?



Markov nets are undirected Bayesian nets. You can't represent all the independencies with Bayesian nets because of directedness and cycles. Thus, one strategy is to remove the directedness. In these nets, we have energies, which don't necessarily sum to 1, but just have to be normalized.

Markov independence is just no path from A-B. Markov blanket for a set X is the set of nodes which cuts the set X off from the rest of the graph. The Markov blanket for a node in a Bayesian net, is its parents, children and children's parents. Parents and children are clear, and cut off the top and bottom of the graph. Children's parents block off the V structure which is the only other escape path.

Markov blankets allow you to calculate probabilities locally, and normalize within.